[Alerting v2][Serverless & 9.5]: Docs for initial public release (M2) (#5528)
elastic/docs-content: explore-analyze/alerting/kibana-alerting-v2.md

---
applies_to:
  stack: unavailable

>   serverless: preview

Reviewer: same as above

Author: Closing for now since making this change would break the docs build CI checks. More info https://github.com/elastic/docs-content-internal/issues/919#issuecomment-4447241973.

## The core idea [kibana-alerting-v2-overview]

{{alerting-v2}} separates *detecting* a problem from *notifying* people about it. A rule watches your data and records what it finds. Separate action policies decide who hears about it and when. This lets you build and test detection logic before wiring up any notifications, and update notification routing without touching your rules.

## The four building blocks

{{alerting-v2}} is built around four objects, rules, alerts, action policies, and workflows, each with a distinct role.

### Rules
A rule defines what to watch for in your data and how often to check. Every rule runs in one of two modes:

- **Detect mode** - The rule records what it finds, but doesn't track whether the problem is ongoing or send any notifications. Use this for observation and investigation.
- **Alert mode** - The rule tracks problems over time and can trigger notifications when something needs attention.

Refer to [Rules](kibana-alerting-v2/rules-v2.md) to learn more.

### Alerts

> When a rule runs in Alert mode, it creates an alert for each problem it detects. An alert isn't a single snapshot. It's an ongoing record that follows the problem through its full lifecycle, from when it first appeared to when it resolved. You triage and manage alerts on the **Alerts** page. Refer to [Alerts](kibana-alerting-v2/alerts-v2.md) to learn more.

Reviewer 2: > When a rule runs in Alert mode, it creates an alert for each problem it detects.

I think this is probably misleading. We probably want to think about making sure we either (a) fully invest in "alert episodes" or (b) abandon it for user-facing labels. If (a), we should talk about "alert episodes" here. 

Either way, rules never create an alert for each problem they detect when they run. You could says something like "Rules running in Alert mode track (alerts|alert episodes) for each problem that they detect." But "create" implies that a new alert is created on each run, I think.

Author: Ah, yeah I can see how this implies that a new alert is created for **_every_** time the rule runs and detects a problem. How about this instead:

```suggestion
In Alert mode, a rule tracks each problem over time. Rather than starting a new alert on every run, the rule keeps updating the same alert until the problem clears. You see one lifecycle for that problem, from when it started to when it resolved, instead of a separate alert per check. You triage and manage them on the **Alerts** page. Refer to [Alerts](kibana-alerting-v2/alerts-v2.md) to learn more.
```

Reviewer: let's use alert episodes and rule_events.

Author: trying to keep this high-level for now so users aren't hit with specialized terms this early on in the overview docs. The linked page will walk them through alert episodes and rule events.

Author: Added the changes [here](https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/5528/changes#r3221635473) into https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/6521.

### Action policies

> An action policy controls whether an alert should trigger a notification, and how often. You can set conditions to filter which alerts it applies to, for example, only critical severity alerts from a specific service. A single action policy can apply to alerts from any rule in your space. Refer to [Notifications](kibana-alerting-v2/notifications-v2.md) to learn more.

Reviewer: trigger an action

Author: Fixed in PR 6521

### Workflows
A workflow is what actually sends the message or runs the automation, for example, posting to Slack or sending an email. Action policies hand off to workflows for delivery. Without a workflow attached, no notification is sent. Refer to [Workflows for {{alerting-v2}}](kibana-alerting-v2/workflows-alerting-v2.md) to learn more.

## How the pieces fit together [how-pieces-fit-together]

$$$detection-and-notification-v2$$$
$$$runtime-execution-order$$$

What happens after a rule finds something depends entirely on the rule's mode.

### Alert mode

Use Alert mode when you want to track issues and be notified. The rule opens an episode when the condition is met and keeps it open until the condition clears.

```

> Rule runs → finds something → writes an alert event

Reviewer: writes and rule_event

Author: Fixed in PR 6521

  → episode opens (pending → active)  → you get notified
  → condition clears (recovering → inactive) → you get notified again
  → action policy → workflow → notification
```

1. The rule evaluates {{esql}} on a schedule and writes an alert event to `.rule-events`.

> 2. The alert event joins an episode, which is tracked until the condition resolves.

Reviewer: rule events

Author: Fixed in PR 6521

4. Matched policies invoke configured workflows, which deliver messages or run automation steps.
5. Notifications are the outcome (email, chat, webhook, and so on) when all prior steps pass.

#### Example: Rule runs in Alert mode

An SRE team creates a rule in Alert mode that checks checkout service latency every five minutes. When p95 exceeds 2 seconds for more than one consecutive check, the rule opens an alert episode. An action policy with a `rule.labels: "checkout"` matcher picks it up, skips low-severity episodes, and sends a Slack message through an on-call workflow.

The on-call engineer gets one message, investigates, fixes a slow query, and latency drops. The episode recovers automatically. No dashboard watching required.

:::{image} ../images/rule-alert-mode-diagram.png
:alt: Diagram of Alert mode flow. A rule runs ES|QL on a schedule. When it finds a match, it writes an alert event tied to an ongoing episode. The episode moves through pending, active, recovering, and inactive states. An action policy matches eligible episodes and routes them to a workflow, which delivers a notification.
:::

### Detect mode

> Use Detect mode when you want to record matches for querying and analysis without alerting anyone. The rule writes a signal and stops. An episode is not opened, and notifications are not sent.

Reviewer: The rule writes a rule-event of type:signal

Author: Fixed in PR 6521

```
Rule runs → finds something → writes a signal event
  → queryable in Discover
  → no episode, no action policy, no notification
```

#### Example: Rule runs in Detect mode

A security team wants to track when a rarely-used admin API endpoint is called, not because every call is a problem, but because the pattern matters during investigations. They create a rule in Detect mode that checks for requests to that endpoint every hour.

> The rule writes a signal each time it finds a match. No episodes are opened and no notifications go out. When an incident is under investigation, the team queries `.rule-events` in Discover to see a full timeline of admin API activity alongside other signals, without any alert noise in between.

Reviewer: this example is going to raise some questions. If the signal never triggers notifications, how would the team know there's an incident?

Author: Updated example in https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/pull/7180.

:::{image} ../images/rule-detect-mode-diagram.png
:alt: Diagram of Detect mode flow. A rule runs ES|QL on a schedule. When it finds a match, it writes a signal event to .rule-events. The signal is available for querying in Discover, dashboards, and ES|QL. No episode is opened, no action policy is evaluated, and no notification is sent.
:::

$$$configuration-order$$$

## {{alerting-v2}} terms [key-concepts-glossary]

These terms appear throughout the {{alerting-v2}} docs. If a term is unclear while reading, check its definition here before going further.

**Action policy**
:   How you control who gets notified, when, and how often. You configure a matcher to filter which alerts it applies to, how alerts should be grouped, and which workflow should send the message. One action policy can apply to alerts from multiple rules. To learn more, refer to [Notifications](kibana-alerting-v2/notifications-v2.md).

> **Alert**

Reviewer: this definition is incorrect. We do not have "alert" per se in alerting v2

:   A rule event produced when a rule runs in Alert mode. Unlike a signal, an alert is tied to an ongoing episode and is part of the full story of that problem from when it started to when it resolved.

**Breach**
:   A single moment when a rule's query finds a match. One breach doesn't necessarily trigger a notification. You can configure a rule to require several consecutive breaches before it confirms the problem is real.

**Episode**
:   The complete record of one problem, from when it was first detected to when it recovered. An episode moves through states (pending, active, recovering, inactive) as the situation changes. This is what you see and act on in the Alerts UI. To learn more, refer to [Alerts](kibana-alerting-v2/alerts-v2.md).

**{{esql}}**
:   The query language every rule uses to search your data. To learn more, refer to the [{{esql}} reference](elasticsearch://reference/query-languages/esql.md).

> **Notification**

Reviewer: action
